1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Aug;78(8):1298-305. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.05.015. Epub 2014 May 23.

Autoinflation for treatment of persistent otitis media with effusion in children:
a cross-over study with a 12-month follow-up.

Bidarian-Moniri A(1), Ramos MJ(2), Ejnell H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska
Academy at the University Of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Centro Hospitalar do
Algarve, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve,
Algarve, Portugal. Electronic address: armin.bidarian@vgregion.se.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Centro Hospitalar do Algarve, Department of
Biomedical Sciences and Medicine, University of Algarve, Algarve, Portugal.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska
Academy at the University Of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: The aims of the present study were to evaluate the efficacy of and
compliance with a new device for autoinflation in the treatment of persistent
otitis media with effusion (OME) in young children.
METHODS: Forty-five children with persistent OME with a bilateral type B or C2
tympanogram for at least three months and history of subjective hearing loss,
waiting for grommet surgery, were randomised to a treatment and a control group.
Twenty-three children aged between three and eight years started as the treatment
group with the new device for autoinflation. Another 22 children, aged between
two and eight years were included as controls. After a period of four weeks, a
cross-over was performed. Both groups underwent otomicroscopy, tympanometry and
audiometry at inclusion and after one and two months for the evaluation of
treatment efficiency. The primary outcome measurements were improvement in
middle-ear pressure and hearing thresholds at eight weeks. Both groups were then
followed up for another 10 months.
RESULTS: In the treatment group, the mean middle-ear pressure for both ears and
the mean hearing thresholds for the best ear improved by 166 daPa (p<0.0001) and
6 dB (p<0.0001), respectively after four weeks, while in the control group,
non-significant alterations were observed. After the cross-over of the control
group to treatment, equivalent improvements in the mean middle-ear pressure and
the mean hearing thresholds of 187 daPa (p<0.0001) and 7 dB (p<0.01),
respectively were achieved also in this group. After treatment in both groups at
eight weeks, four of 45 children were submitted to grommet surgery. During the
long-term follow-up another five children were submitted to surgery due to
recurrence of disease. All the children managed to perform the manoeuvre and no
side-effects were detected.
CONCLUSION: The device demonstrated efficiency in improving both middle-ear
pressure and hearing thresholds in most children after four weeks of treatment.
It might therefore be possible to consider this method of autoinflation in
children with persistent OME during the watchful waiting period.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.05.015
PMID: 24882460  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Wrong intervention


2. Laryngoscope. 2008 Nov;118(11):2040-3. doi: 10.1097/MLG.0b013e31818208d6.

The treatment for postirradiation otitis media with effusion: a study of three
methods.

Xu YD(1), Ou YK, Zheng YQ, Chen Y, Ji SF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore treatments for postirradiation otitis media with effusion
(OME) in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
STUDY DESIGN: This study is a prospective quasi-randomized clinical trial.
METHODS: Ninety-six patients (135 ears) with OME after the first course of
radiotherapy for nasopharyngeal carcinoma were divided into three groups: simple
auripuncture plus aspiration, tympanic membrane fenestration with cauterization,
and myringotomy plus grommet insertion. Cure rates and incidences of
complications were compared.
RESULTS: Two deaths occurred. The other 94 patients (132 ears) finished a 2-year
follow-up. In group 1, four ears (8.9%) were cured after the first treatment and
17 ears overall (37.8%) were cured by the end of the follow-up. Twenty ears
(44.4%) had persistent fluid, two ears (4.4%) developed chronic suppurative
otitis media, and five ears (11.1%) developed dry eardrum perforation. In group
2, seven ears (15.6%) were cured after the first treatment and 21 ears overall
(46.7%) were cured by the end of the follow-up. Fourteen ears (31.1%) had
persistent fluid, three ears (6.7%) developed chronic suppurative otitis media,
and seven ears (15.6%) developed dry eardrum perforation. In group 3, eight ears
(17.8%) were cured after the first treatment and 23 ears overall (51.1%) were
cured by the end of the follow-up. Seven ears (15.6%) had persistent fluid, five
ears (11.1%) developed chronic suppurative otitis media, three ears (6.7%)
developed eardrum perforation with effusion, and five ears (11.1%) developed dry
eardrum perforation.
CONCLUSION: The methods each have advantages and disadvantages. We believe that a
step by step approach should be used when choosing the treatment method for
postirradiation OME. That is, first apply auripuncture plus aspiration, and then
the other methods if this approach is inadequate. Enhanced local care after
grommet insertion can effectively reduce the incidence of complications.

DOI: 10.1097/MLG.0b013e31818208d6
PMID: 18818551  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Wrong participants


3. Otol Neurotol. 2008 Aug;29(5):658-60. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e3181776749.

Optimizing local anesthesia for grommet insertion: eutectic mixture of local
anaesthetics versus Ametop: a randomized clinical trial.

Nichani J(1), Camilleri AE, Broomfield S, Saeed S.

Author information:
(1)South Manchester University Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom.
jayanichani@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effect of eutetic mixture of local anesthetics (EMLA)
with Ametop in providing local anesthesia for grommet insertion.
STUDY DESIGN: Double-blind randomized clinical trial.
SETTING: University teaching hospital.
PATIENTS: Forty-one adult patients diagnosed with otitis media with effusion were
recruited into the trial and underwent grommet insertion under local anesthesia;
21 were randomly allocated to the EMLA group and 20 to the Ametop group.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome measure of the study was the level of
pain experienced by the patient. The secondary outcome measure was the overall
satisfaction with the procedure. Both measures were assessed using visual
analogue scales.
RESULTS: Both the topical anesthetic agents provided good pain relief during
grommet insertion. There was no statistically significant difference in the pain
or satisfaction scores.
CONCLUSION: Both EMLA and Ametop can provide good local anesthetic effect during
grommet insertion.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e3181776749
PMID: 18665031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Wrong study question

4. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2007 May;119(6):1859-65.

Does palatal muscle reconstruction affect the functional outcome of cleft palate
surgery?

Hassan ME(1), Askar S.

Author information:
(1)General Surgery Department, Pediatric Surgery Unit, Faculty of Medicine,
Zagazig University, Zagazig City, Egypt. dmia88@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: This study was designed to compare two-layer palatoplasty
(Wardill-Kilner V-Y pushback technique) without intravelar veloplasty versus
three-layer palatoplasty (Kriens technique) with intravelar veloplasty with
regard to postoperative functional outcome of eustachian tube and velopharyngeal
competence.
METHODS: A prospective cohort study was conducted enrolling 70 patients with
nonsyndromic cleft palate (except submucous type of cleft) over a period of 2
years. They were divided into two main groups according to the type of cleft
palate: group A (Veau class II) included 32 patients and group B (Veau class I)
included 38 patients. In each group, Wardill-Kilner palatoplasty (two-layer
repair without intravelar veloplasty) versus Kriens palatoplasty (three-layer
repair with intravelar veloplasty) was randomly selected for patients.
RESULTS: For the three-layer palatoplasty in both groups, there was a greater
tendency for resolution of secretory otitis media in the early postoperative
period, less time required for extrusion of the grommet tube, and a lower
incidence of recurrent secretory otitis media. The incidence of postoperative
velopharyngeal incompetence was greater with two-layer palatoplasty group. The
incidence of palatal fistula was greater with three-layer palatoplasty.
CONCLUSIONS: Palatal muscle reconstruction in cleft palate patients confers
better functional results regarding velopharyngeal competence and eustachian tube
function. Although the overall incidence of postoperative palatal fistula is
within the accepted range, the incidence of fistula is higher in the palatal
muscle reconstruction subgroup. Future studies are required that include a larger
number of patients.

DOI: 10.1097/01.prs.0000259185.29517.79
PMID: 17440366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Wrong study

5. Otol Neurotol. 2005 Sep;26(5):882-9.

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for sudden sensorineural hearing loss: a prospective
trial of patients failing steroid and antiviral treatment.

Horn CE(1), Himel HN, Selesnick SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Weill Medical
College, Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the safety and efficacy of hyperbaric oxygen therapy
(HBOT) in adult patients with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SSNHL) who fail
standard of care steroid and antiviral therapy.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: An urban tertiary referral center.
PATIENTS: Nine adult patients presenting with SSNHL from December 2002 through
February 2004. Patients with acute onset SSNHL of greater than 30 dB in three
contiguous frequencies who failed to show audiometric improvement after 2 weeks
of systemic steroids and antivirals were enrolled.
INTERVENTIONS: Study patients received HBOT at 2.0 atmospheric pressure for 90
minutes while breathing 100% oxygen under a clear plastic hood in the chamber.
Treatments were administered daily for 10 days over a 2-week period.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Pre-and postHBOT mean hearing gains measured in decibels
for pure-tone audiometry at 0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4 KHz for bone and additional 8 KHz
for air; pure-tone averages for air and bone; speech reception thresholds; and
speech discrimination levels. Patient-reported subjective recovery rates
(completely, substantially, partially, not improved) were also recorded.
RESULTS: Overall, two patients had a dramatic improvement, and one patient had a
dramatic improvement in his speech discrimination without improvement in other
audiometric measures. Six patients had no demonstrable hearing gains. Two
patients had complications of serous otitis media requiring myringotomy and
pressure equalizing tube placement. No other complications were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Secondary HBOT after failure of systemic steroid and antiviral
therapy may be associated with hearing gains in some patients with SSNHL.


PMID: 16151333  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Wrong study

6. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1994;103(1):95-101.

Treatment of secretory otitis media with local instillation of hydroxyzine.

Theoharides TC(1), Manolidis SS, Vliagoftis H, Manolidis LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, Mass. 02111.

The study is a preliminary single-blind, placebo- and prednisolone-controlled
investigation of the treatment of 156 children with otitis media with effusion
(secretory otitis media, SOM), ranging from 2 to 12 years. The protocol involved
tympanotomy and placement of a ventilation tube (grommet), through which control
or drug solutions were introduced. Other parameters and coexisting symptoms which
could contribute to SOM were also examined. Patients were divided into 3 groups
as follows: group A: control (normal saline, 2 ml); group B: prednisolone (25 mg
in 2 ml); group C: hydroxyzine pamoate (10(-5) M in 2 ml). The results indicate
that in those children treated with hydroxyzine, the rate of relapse was
significantly reduced and so was the amount of histamine present in middle ear
effusions. The effectiveness of hydroxyzine is discussed in the context of the
pathophysiology of SOM, especially with respect to mast cells and their
activation by allergic and nonallergic means.


PMID: 8260856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Wrong comparison group (all of them were surgical)

7. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Belg. 1994;48(4):317-24.

The long term outcome of secretory otitis media in children and the effects of
surgical treatment: a ten year study.

Maw AR(1), Bawden R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Bristol Royal Infirmary, Royal Hospital for Sick
Children, UK.

Two hundred and twenty two children with bilateral secretory otitis media were
allocated at random for adenoidectomy, adenotonsillectomy or for neither
procedure. In all cases only a unilateral grommet was inserted. The contralateral
unoperated ear was examined during a ten year period to show otoscopic clearance,
change in tympanometric status and improvement in mean hearing threshold.
Adenoidectomy or insertion of a grommet alone produces similar improvement but in
combination are more effective than either procedure in isolation. The unoperated
ear in cases not receiving either procedure reflects the natural history of the
condition. It shows a steady improvement in all outcome measures as time passes.


PMID: 7810300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
selected

8. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 1993 Jun;18(3):188-92.

Conservative treatment of otitis media with effusion by autoinflation of the
middle ear.

Blanshard JD(1), Maw AR, Bawden R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Bristol Royal Infirmary, UK.

A total of 85 children on the waiting list for grommet insertion aged between 3
and 10 years with bilateral chronic otitis media with effusion (OME) were
assigned at random to an observation or treatment group. Those in the treatment
group were given the Otovent device to use three times a day for the duration of
the study and both groups were then seen at monthly intervals for 3 months for
pneumatic otoscopy and tympanometry. Statistically significant improvement was
seen in those using the treatment with a compliance of more than 70%. This was
detected on the outcome measures of tympanometry and pneumatic otoscopy after 1,
2 and 3 months. No side effects were demonstrated. We conclude that autoinflation
is an effective short-term treatment for children with OME when used regularly
under supervision.


PMID: 8365006  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
wrong intervention

9. J Laryngol Otol. 1993 Apr;107(4):284-9.

A randomized study of the surgical management of children with persistent otitis
media with effusion associated with a hearing impairment.

Dempster JH(1), Browning GG, Gatehouse SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Royal Infirmary, Glasgow.

The object of this study was to compare the effect on the hearing of the
insertion of a grommet, with or without adenoidectomy, against a non-surgically
managed control ear in children with persistent hearing impairment due to otitis
media with effusion. Seventy-eight children (44 boys, 34 girls, mean age 5.8
years) with documented bilateral otitis media with effusion associated with a
bilateral hearing impairment (pure tone average air conduction thresholds over
0.5, 1 and 2 kHz of > or = 25 dB HL) over a three month period were admitted to a
randomized, controlled trial. Each child was randomized to have or not to have an
adenoidectomy. The ears in each child were then randomly allocated to have a
grommet (tympanostomy tube) inserted. The children's hearing status was reviewed
six and 12 months post-operatively. During follow-up, should a child redevelop a
persistent bilateral hearing impairment (as defined above) for three months they
were managed with a hearing aid. Thus no child had repeat insertion of a grommet.
Surgery of each type had an effect on the hearing and the presence of otitis
media with effusion at six months post-operatively but not at 12 months when it
was no different from natural resolution. If resolution of the otitis media with
effusion is the outcome measure, then adenoidectomy alone is significantly better
than no surgery but only in boys rather than in girls. Even in boys it only
resolves about 60 per cent of effusions. However, when combined with a grommet
(one insertion) adenoidectomy gives no greater resolution (89 per cent compared
with 86 per cent).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 8320510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selected

10. J Laryngol Otol. 1993 Feb;107(2):108-10.

The mini-grommet and tympanosclerosis: results at two years.

Dingle AF(1), Flood LM, Kumar BU, Hampal S.

Author information:
(1)North Riding Infirmary, Middlesbrough, Cleveland.

One hundred and sixteen children with otitis media with effusion (OME) underwent
surgery with grommet insertion. A conventional Shah grommet was used in one ear,
and a Mini-Shah grommet in the other. Final review of the subjects two years
after surgery revealed a significantly lesser degree of tympanosclerosis in the
ear into which the Mini-Shah grommet had been inserted. This benefit might have
resulted from the lesser mass of the mini-tube or its shorter duration in situ.


PMID: 8496640  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
wrong comparison

11. Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci. 1992 Oct;17(5):411-4.

The effect of parental smoking on outcome after treatment for glue ear in
children.

Maw AR(1), Parker AJ, Lance GN, Dilkes MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Bristol Royal Infirmary, UK.

A sample of 201 children aged between 2 and 9 years with bilateral chronic otitis
media with effusion (OME) were treated prospectively and at random by
adenoidectomy, adenotonsillectomy, or with neither procedure. In all cases only a
unilateral grommet was inserted and the contralateral unoperated ear was examined
one year post-operatively for persistence or resolution of the effusion. A
self-administered questionnaire was completed by the parents concerning their
smoking habits. The resolution of effusion following surgery was assessed in
relation to smoking by by the mother and father separately and in combination.
Clearance of glue was statistically less frequent where the child's mother or
where both parents smoked. This was related to the number of cigarettes smoked by
the mother or both parents. The adverse effect was demonstrable whether or not
adenoidectomy or adenotonsillectomy had been performed for treatment. The
findings lend further support or professional and governmental opinions of a
deleterious effect of passive smoke exposure on children and in this case
parental smoking has been shown to have an adverse effect on the outcome of OME
following surgical treatment.


PMID: 1458623  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
wrong study question

12. J Laryngol Otol. 1991 Mar;105(3):161-4.

The mini-grommet and tympanosclerosis.

Hampal S(1), Flood LM, Kumar BU.

Author information:
(1)Research Foundation, North Riding Infirmary, Middlesbrough.

One hundred and sixteen children with otitis media with effusion underwent
myringotomy and insertion of a conventional pattern of Shah grommet in one ear
and the much smaller Mini Shah grommet in the other. Close observation
post-operatively determined the comparative rate of extrusion, recurrence of
effusion, and of onset and degree of tympanosclerosis. At one year review, the
Mini Shah shows a significantly earlier extrusion and a greater tendency to
recurrence of otitis media with effusion. However, this is compensated by a
decreased incidence of tympanosclerosis and reduced severity in those affected.
This tends to support the view that shear forces produced by heavier patterns of
ventilation tube promote tympanosclerosis.


PMID: 2019798  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
wrong comparison

13. BMJ. 1990 Jun 16;300(6739):1551-6.

A randomised controlled trial of surgery for glue ear.

Black NA(1), Sanderson CF, Freeland AP, Vessey MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine.

Comment in
    BMJ. 1990 Aug 4;301(6746):289-90.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of five different surgical treatments for glue
ear (secretory otitis media) on improvement in hearing and, assuming one or more
treatments to be effective, to identify the appropriate indications for surgery.
DESIGN: Randomised controlled trial of children receiving (a) adenoidectomy,
bilateral myringotomy, and insertion of a unilateral grommet; (b) adenoidectomy,
unilateral myringotomy, and insertion of a unilateral grommet; (c) bilateral
myringotomy and insertion of a unilateral grommet; and (d) unilateral myringotomy
and insertion of a grommet. Children were followed up at seven weeks, six months,
12 months, and 24 months by symptom history and clinical investigations.
SETTING: Otolaryngology department in an urban hospital.
PATIENTS: 149 Children aged 4-9 years who were admitted for surgery for glue ear
and who had no history of previous operations on tonsils, adenoids, or ears and
no evidence of sensorineural deafness. Inadequate follow up information on levels
of hearing and on middle ear function was obtained from 22.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Mean hearing loss (dB) of the three worst heard
frequencies between 250 and 4000 Hz, results of impedance tympanometry, and
parental views on their child's progress.
RESULTS: In the 127 children for whom adequate information was available ears in
which a grommet had been inserted performed better in the short term (for at
least six months) than those in which no grommet had been inserted, irrespective
of any accompanying procedure. Most of the benefit had disappeared by 12 months.
Adenoidectomy produced a slight improvement that was not significant, though was
sustained for at least two years. The ears of children who had had an
adenoidectomy with myringotomy and grommet insertion, however, continued to
improve so that two years after surgery about 50% had abnormal tympanometry
compared with 83% of those who had had only myringotomy and grommet insertion,
and 93% of the group that had had no treatment. Logistic regression analyses
identified preoperative hearing level as the single best predictor of good
outcome from surgery. Other variables contributed little additional predictive
power.
CONCLUSIONS: If the principal objective of surgery for glue ear is to restore
hearing then our study shows that insertion of grommets is the treatment of
choice. The addition of an adenoidectomy will increase the likelihood of
restoration of normal function of the middle ear but will not improve hearing.
When deciding appropriate indications for surgery, a balance has to be made
between performing unnecessary operations and failing to treat patients who might
benefit from surgical intervention. Preoperative audiometry scores might be the
best predictor in helping to make this decision.


PMCID: PMC1663097
PMID: 2196954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selected
