1. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Belg. 1994;48(4):317-24.

The long term outcome of secretory otitis media in children and the effects of
surgical treatment: a ten year study.

Maw AR(1), Bawden R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Bristol Royal Infirmary, Royal Hospital for Sick
Children, UK.

Two hundred and twenty two children with bilateral secretory otitis media were
allocated at random for adenoidectomy, adenotonsillectomy or for neither
procedure. In all cases only a unilateral grommet was inserted. The contralateral
unoperated ear was examined during a ten year period to show otoscopic clearance,
change in tympanometric status and improvement in mean hearing threshold.
Adenoidectomy or insertion of a grommet alone produces similar improvement but in
combination are more effective than either procedure in isolation. The unoperated
ear in cases not receiving either procedure reflects the natural history of the
condition. It shows a steady improvement in all outcome measures as time passes.


PMID: 7810300  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. BMJ. 1993 Mar 20;306(6880):756-60.

Spontaneous resolution of severe chronic glue ear in children and the effect of
adenoidectomy, tonsillectomy, and insertion of ventilation tubes (grommets).

Maw R(1), Bawden R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Bristol Royal Infirmary.

OBJECTIVE: To measure the time to spontaneous resolution of severe chronic otitis
media with effusion (glue ear) in children and study the effects of
adenoidectomy, adenotonsillectomy, and ventilation tubes (grommets).
DESIGN: Randomised controlled study over 12 years.
SETTING: Paediatric otorhinolaryngology clinics and in-patient unit.
SUBJECTS: 228 children aged 2-9 years with pronounced hearing loss from glue ear
and persistent bilateral middle ear effusions confirmed on three occasions over
three months.
INTERVENTIONS: Children were randomly allocated to adenotonsillectomy,
adenoidectomy, or neither procedure. In all groups a Shepard type ventilation
tube was inserted in one randomly chosen ear. Follow up was annually for five
years and then less often for up to seven years four months. For analysis the two
operated groups were combined.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Otoscopic clearance of fluid, change in tympanogram, and
improvement in mean audiometric hearing threshold.
RESULTS: Survival analysis showed appreciable otoscopic and tympanometric
resolution of fluid with ventilation tubes alone and adenoidectomy alone compared
with no surgery. Further improvement was seen after combination of both
treatments. Mean audiometric hearing thresholds improved with fluid resolution.
Resolution was delayed in younger children and in those whose parents smoked,
irrespective of treatment. Whereas a single insertion of a Shepard tube resolved
the glue for a mean (SD) period of 9.5 (5.2) months, the effect of adenoidectomy
was sustained throughout follow up.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of glue ear considerably shortened the time to fluid
resolution, combined adenoidectomy and tube insertion being better than either
procedure alone. Resolution was longer in younger children and those whose
parent(s) smoked, irrespective of treatment.


PMCID: PMC1677213
PMID: 8490338  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. BMJ. 1990 Jun 16;300(6739):1551-6.

A randomised controlled trial of surgery for glue ear.

Black NA(1), Sanderson CF, Freeland AP, Vessey MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Policy, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine.

Comment in
    BMJ. 1990 Aug 4;301(6746):289-90.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of five different surgical treatments for glue
ear (secretory otitis media) on improvement in hearing and, assuming one or more
treatments to be effective, to identify the appropriate indications for surgery.
DESIGN: Randomised controlled trial of children receiving (a) adenoidectomy,
bilateral myringotomy, and insertion of a unilateral grommet; (b) adenoidectomy,
unilateral myringotomy, and insertion of a unilateral grommet; (c) bilateral
myringotomy and insertion of a unilateral grommet; and (d) unilateral myringotomy
and insertion of a grommet. Children were followed up at seven weeks, six months,
12 months, and 24 months by symptom history and clinical investigations.
SETTING: Otolaryngology department in an urban hospital.
PATIENTS: 149 Children aged 4-9 years who were admitted for surgery for glue ear
and who had no history of previous operations on tonsils, adenoids, or ears and
no evidence of sensorineural deafness. Inadequate follow up information on levels
of hearing and on middle ear function was obtained from 22.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Mean hearing loss (dB) of the three worst heard
frequencies between 250 and 4000 Hz, results of impedance tympanometry, and
parental views on their child's progress.
RESULTS: In the 127 children for whom adequate information was available ears in
which a grommet had been inserted performed better in the short term (for at
least six months) than those in which no grommet had been inserted, irrespective
of any accompanying procedure. Most of the benefit had disappeared by 12 months.
Adenoidectomy produced a slight improvement that was not significant, though was
sustained for at least two years. The ears of children who had had an
adenoidectomy with myringotomy and grommet insertion, however, continued to
improve so that two years after surgery about 50% had abnormal tympanometry
compared with 83% of those who had had only myringotomy and grommet insertion,
and 93% of the group that had had no treatment. Logistic regression analyses
identified preoperative hearing level as the single best predictor of good
outcome from surgery. Other variables contributed little additional predictive
power.
CONCLUSIONS: If the principal objective of surgery for glue ear is to restore
hearing then our study shows that insertion of grommets is the treatment of
choice. The addition of an adenoidectomy will increase the likelihood of
restoration of normal function of the middle ear but will not improve hearing.
When deciding appropriate indications for surgery, a balance has to be made
between performing unnecessary operations and failing to treat patients who might
benefit from surgical intervention. Preoperative audiometry scores might be the
best predictor in helping to make this decision.


PMCID: PMC1663097
PMID: 2196954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Laryngol Otol. 1993 Apr;107(4):284-9.

A randomized study of the surgical management of children with persistent otitis
media with effusion associated with a hearing impairment.

Dempster JH(1), Browning GG, Gatehouse SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Royal Infirmary, Glasgow.

The object of this study was to compare the effect on the hearing of the
insertion of a grommet, with or without adenoidectomy, against a non-surgically
managed control ear in children with persistent hearing impairment due to otitis
media with effusion. Seventy-eight children (44 boys, 34 girls, mean age 5.8
years) with documented bilateral otitis media with effusion associated with a
bilateral hearing impairment (pure tone average air conduction thresholds over
0.5, 1 and 2 kHz of > or = 25 dB HL) over a three month period were admitted to a
randomized, controlled trial. Each child was randomized to have or not to have an
adenoidectomy. The ears in each child were then randomly allocated to have a
grommet (tympanostomy tube) inserted. The children's hearing status was reviewed
six and 12 months post-operatively. During follow-up, should a child redevelop a
persistent bilateral hearing impairment (as defined above) for three months they
were managed with a hearing aid. Thus no child had repeat insertion of a grommet.
Surgery of each type had an effect on the hearing and the presence of otitis
media with effusion at six months post-operatively but not at 12 months when it
was no different from natural resolution. If resolution of the otitis media with
effusion is the outcome measure, then adenoidectomy alone is significantly better
than no surgery but only in boys rather than in girls. Even in boys it only
resolves about 60 per cent of effusions. However, when combined with a grommet
(one insertion) adenoidectomy gives no greater resolution (89 per cent compared
with 86 per cent).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)


PMID: 8320510  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1991 Jan;10(1):2-11.

Evaluation of ventilating tubes and myringotomy in the treatment of recurrent or
persistent otitis media.

Le CT(1), Freeman DW, Fireman BH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Sacramento, CA
95403-2192.

Comment in
    Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1991 Apr;10(4):269-74.

In a prospective controlled study of the efficacy and sequelae of ventilating
tubes, 44 children with bilateral recurrent acute otitis media (greater than 6
episodes/year) and 13 children with bilateral persistent middle ear effusion
(greater than 3 months) received unilateral ventilating tube insertion in a
randomly selected ear. The contralateral ears were randomized to receive either
myringotomy alone or no surgery. Clinical, otoscopic, tympanometric and
audiologic examinations were performed before the study and 2 to 4 weeks later,
then at 3-month intervals for up to 2 years and at 36 months after surgical
randomization. Medical therapy and antibiotic prophylaxis were used whenever
indicated. While the ventilating tubes remained functional (mean duration, 10
months) the ears with a tube had significantly fewer episodes of otitis media
than their contralateral ear (P less than 0.001; 95% confidence intervals -0.7,
-1.7) and had more hearing improvement (P = 0.005; 95% confidence intervals,
-5.9, -1.2). After tube extrusion there was a tendency for surgically treated
ears to have more otitis and worse hearing, but not at a significant level.
Tympanosclerosis, retraction and atrophy were more common in ears that received
tubes. The majority of ears treated medically also improved. There is need for a
more cautious and selective use of ventilating tubes.


PMID: 2003051  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Clin Otolaryngol. 2012 Apr;37(2):107-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-4486.2012.02469.x.

Adjuvant adenoidectomy in persistent bilateral otitis media with effusion:
hearing and revision surgery outcomes through 2 years in the TARGET randomised
trial.

MRC Multicentre Otitis Media Study Group(1).

Collaborators: Haggard MP, Gannon MM, Birkin JA, Bennett KE, Nicholls EE, Spencer
H, Browning GG, Georgalas C, Daniel M, Bhutta M, Higson JM, Smith SC, Hind SE,
Rovers MM, Egner EM, Hayman T, Greenwood DC, Carroll RA, Jones H, Richmond TB,
Wade AR, Moorjani P, Pearson DA, Kirk G, Baskill JL, Adams DA, Toner JG, Gibbin
KP, Jones NS, Birchall JP, Thomas RS, Narula AA, Murty GE, Griffiths MV, Wilson
JA, Meikle D, Johnson IJ, Date S, Kerr AI, Robinson D, Madden G, Bull PD, Chapman
DF, Parker AJ, Curry AR, Williams RG, Morrissey MS, Geddes NK, Zarod AP, Willatt
DJ, Proops D, Pearman K, Robb PJ, MacKee I, Law K, Casey M, Megarry A, Smith L,
Smethurst H, Pearce G, Hook P, Phipps J, Gibbs S, Dunster S, Brown E, Birch EM,
Page V, Sim A, Sharples G, Crawford J, Davies C, Bartolo J, Edwards C, Wilson J,
Johnson N, Baxendale C, Welsby W, Pickavance N, Cox V, Markham K, Robb JA,
Flanagan R, Housten G, Jordan G, Bingham M, Cassidy J, Burns C, Hamill C, Glover
L, Eccles L, Armstrong-Bednall G, Towle B, Dyer K, Carr J, Herrod J, Levick A,
Dunmore P, Parker-Emery C, Sutton R, Gordon C, Midgley L, Barnett N, Foley R,
Machlin R, Elliott C, Davidson T, Walker L, Keith J, Brady M, Barr-Hamilton R,
Wilson S, McKenzie J, Edgar R, Noble H, Thomas H, Paul B, Gilbert M, Hoblyn R,
Walter S, Griffiths E, Inge F, Hodges M, Lawrence C, Walsh A, Loxley T, Byrom P,
Walker D, Najaran R, Blyth G, Mace L, Rabaiotti W, Trearty C, Carmichael A,
Ronson R, France K, Pilkington H, Hilton F, Parsons J, Whitby G, Robinson S,
Brown E, James P, Allen R.

Author information:
(1)MRC Scottish Section Institute of Hearing Research, Glasgow, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the adjuvant effects of adenoidectomy with short-stay
ventilation tubes to hearing and revision surgery in children over 3.5 years with
persistent otitis media with effusion.
DESIGN: Randomised controlled three armed trial: observation, short-stay
ventilation tube or ventilation tubes with adjuvant adenoidectomy. Five follow-up
visits over 2 years.
SETTING: Eleven UK Otorhinolaryngology Departments.
PARTICIPANTS: Children with bilateral otitis media with effusion and better ear
hearing level (HL) ≥20 dB persistent for 3 months. Of the 425 eligible children,
376 (88%) accepted randomisation.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Pure-tone hearing thresholds, eligibility for and actual
revision surgery rates, otoscopic sequelae and complications of adenoidectomy.
RESULTS: Loss to follow-up at 3, 12 and 24 months was 2%, 6% and 5% respectively.
Of the 376 randomised children, 253 (67%) had complete data for all five
follow-up visits. Adenoidectomy did not add to the benefit to hearing thresholds
of ventilation tubes of 8.8 dB (CI: 7.1-10.5) averaged over 3-6 months
postoperatively. Averaged over 12, 18 and 24 months, adenoidectomy provided 4.2
dB of benefit (CI: 2.6-5.7) whilst ventilation tubes gave no benefit.
Standardised effect sizes through two years showed equal benefit from ventilation
tubes (0.50 sd) and adenoidectomy (0.61 sd) which are additive (1.11 sd).
Adenoidectomy halved the numbers meeting a 25 dB HL bilateral cut-off for
eligibility for repeat tube surgery from 31% to 14% at 12 months and from 33% to
15% at 18 months. The actual reduction in re-insertion surgery (absolute risk
difference) was 21%. In tubed ears, tympanosclerosis occurred in 27%, but
otorrhoea in only <2% and permanent perforations in <1%. These events did not
occur in control ears. In children that had adenoidectomy, one of 165 (0.6%) had
haemorrhage that required return to theatre.
CONCLUSIONS: Adjuvant adenoidectomy doubles benefit from short-stay ventilation
tubes by extending better hearing through the second year in children aged
3.25-6.75 years with persistent otitis media with effusion with at least a 20 dB
HL in both ears. The duration of benefit of adenoidectomy is related to the
duration of function of the type of the ventilation tubes used. Adenoidectomy
also substantially reduces eligibility for revision surgery.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-4486.2012.02469.x
PMID: 22443163  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Laryngoscope. 2004 May;114(5):844-9.

Laser myringotomy versus ventilation tubes in children with otitis media with
effusion: a randomized trial.

Koopman JP(1), Reuchlin AG, Kummer EE, Boumans LJ, Rijntjes E, Hoeve LJ, Mulder
PG, Blom HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. j.koopman@leyenburg-ziekenhuis.nl

OBJECTIVES: Insertion of ventilation tubes in children with otitis media with
effusion (OME) is an accepted and common treatment procedure. The majority of
patients require general anesthesia. Although laser myringotomy can be performed
in local anesthesia, evidence is lacking that this treatment modality is an
alternative for tubes, and outcome predictors for laser myringotomy are not
available.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective randomized trial.
METHODS: We screened 1,403 children with chronic OME that were indicated for
placement of ventilation tubes. In the eligible patients, we performed laser
myringotomy in one ear and placed a tube in the other ear, both within the same
patient. Follow-up was scheduled each month for 6 months. Success was defined as
absence of effusion or aural discharge. A logistic regression model was used with
success of the therapy as binary outcome. This model was based on base-line
variables, asked for in a parent's questionnaire.
RESULTS: Two hundred eight children received the allocated intervention, and no
complications occurred. The mean closure time of the laser perforation was 2.4
weeks, and the mean patency time of the ventilation tube was 4.0 months. The mean
success rate was 40% for laser and 78% for tubes. Ten known variables were found
to predict middle ear status after therapy.
CONCLUSION: Laser myringotomy is a safe but less-effective procedure than
insertion of a ventilation tube in the treatment of chronic OME. The prognostic
model enables the otolaryngologist to choose the surgical treatment for the child
that benefits most: laser myringotomy or ventilation tube.

DOI: 10.1097/00005537-200405000-00010
PMID: 15126741  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Laryngol Otol. 2011 Mar;125(3):274-8. doi: 10.1017/S0022215110002549. Epub 2010
Dec 16.

Adenoidectomy plus tympanostomy tube insertion versus adenoidectomy plus
myringotomy in children with obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome.

Vlastos IM(1), Houlakis M, Kandiloros D, Manolopoulos L, Ferekidis E, Yiotakis I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital of Athens,
Athens, Greece. giannisvlastos@yahoo.gr

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether tympanostomy tube insertion has benefit, compared
with simple myringotomy, in children with otitis media with effusion who receive
concurrent adenoidectomy as treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome
caused by adenoid hypertrophy.
METHODS: Fifty-two children older than three years with obstructive sleep apnoea
syndrome were randomly assigned to receive either adenoidectomy plus tympanostomy
tube insertion (group one, n = 25) or adenoidectomy plus myringotomy (group two,
n = 27). Pre- and post-operative health-related quality of life was assessed
using the otitis media-6 (OM-6) tool, and audiological outcomes were recorded six
and 12 months post-operatively.
RESULTS: Group one showed better quality of life scores six months
post-operatively (score difference -0.38, confidence interval -0.65 to -0.10) but
not 12 months post-operatively (score difference -0.23, confidence interval -0.76
to 0.11), compared with pre-operative values. Audiological outcomes did not
differ significantly at either time point, compared with pre-operative values.
CONCLUSION: Tympanostomy tube insertion confers a short term benefit, compared
with simple myringotomy, in children older than three years with otitis media
with effusion who receive concurrent adenoidectomy as treatment for obstructive
sleep apnoea syndrome. Further studies are necessary to identify which of these
children will receive long-lasting benefit from tympanostomy tube insertion.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215110002549
PMID: 21205368  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

